

Why volatile keyword fails in the incrementing of counter ?

Understanding volatile in Java

Definition and Purpose:
The volatile keyword in Java is used to indicate that a variable's value will be modified by different threads.
It ensures that changes to the variable are always visible to other threads.

Normally, each thread can cache variables in its own CPU cache → meaning a change made by one thread might not be visible to another thread immediately.
When you declare a variable volatile, you’re telling the JVM:
                “Always read and write this variable directly from the main memory, not from a thread’s local cache.”

  When a variable is declared as volatile, it means:

Visibility Guarantee: Any read of a volatile variable will always return the most recent write by any thread.
Happens-Before Relationship: A write to a volatile variable happens-before every subsequent read of that same variable.

When to Use volatile:

Flags and State Variables: When you have a flag or state variable that is read by multiple threads but only written to by one thread.
Double-Checked Locking: To ensure the correct initialization of a singleton instance.
Publishing Objects: To safely publish an object reference to other threads.
Non-blocking Counters: In scenarios where you need visibility but not strict atomicity.
Increment Operation and Atomicity

Incrementing a counter (counter++) is not a single, atomic operation. Instead, it involves multiple steps:

Read: The current value of the variable is read from memory.
Increment: The value is incremented by one.
Write: The new value is written back to memory.
Even though volatile ensures visibility, it does not guarantee that these steps will be executed atomically.
This means that when multiple threads are incrementing the same volatile variable, they can interfere with each other, leading to race conditions.

Detailed Example of Race Condition

Let's consider an example where two threads, Thread A and Thread B, are incrementing a volatile counter:

Initial State:
Counter is initialized to 0.
Thread A and Thread B are both about to increment the counter.

Thread A Reads:
Thread A reads the value of the counter (0).

Thread B Reads:
Before Thread A can write back the incremented value, Thread B reads the value of the counter (still 0).

Thread A Increments and Writes:
Thread A increments the value to 1 and writes it back to the counter.

Thread B Increments and Writes:
Thread B, which read the counter as 0, increments it to 1 and writes it back to the counter.

Final State:
Both threads have incremented the counter once, but due to the race condition, the final value of the counter is 1 instead of the expected 2.
Summary

volatile ensures visibility but not atomicity.
Increment operations (counter++) are not atomic and involve multiple steps.
Using synchronized or AtomicInteger ensures atomicity, preventing race conditions and ensuring the correct final value.
Difference Between volatile and AtomicInteger

Volatile:
Guarantees visibility of changes to variables across threads.
Suitable for simple flags and state variables.
Does not ensure atomicity for compound operations like incrementing.

AtomicInteger: --> Internally uses COMPARE AND SWAP (CAS) method ( that is a atomic operation)
Ensures both visibility and atomicity for operations.
Provides atomic methods like incrementAndGet() and decrementAndGet().
Suitable for counters and other variables that require atomic operations.
In conclusion, volatile is useful for ensuring visibility of changes to variables across threads without the overhead of synchronization but is not suitable for compound operations that require atomicity.
For atomic operations, AtomicInteger or synchronization mechanisms like synchronized should be used.


Remember AtomicVariables also fail in race conditions in following cases

if (count.get() > 0) {
    count.decrementAndGet(); // ❌ still race possible
}

because on the above we have a check and an atomic operation. So total (check + atomic) != atomic operation
==> Two threads might pass the condition check at same time

Remember only incrementAndGet(), decrementAndGet() , getAndIncrement(), compareAndSwap() are only atomic. We should not combine them with checks and conditions